= Interop
:page-permalink: /:path/interop
:page-layout: page_rules_ocaml
:page-pkg: rules_ocaml
:page-doc: ug
:page-tags: [dependencies]
:page-last_updated: May 4, 2022
:page-toc: false


== Polyglot Programming

Bazel has excellent, even unparalled support for projects that involve
multiple programming languages. Bazel LSPs are available for most of
the languages typically used in such projects. For example, it is not
uncommon to have tools written in one language - say, shell scripts,
python, javascript, etc. - that generate or proprocess code for
another language. Bazel handles such situations with aplomb - all you
need to do is import the ruleset for the language and write the
targets for your code.

Another common polyglot situation arises when you want to use a
library written in a "foreign" language. A typical case for OCaml is
the need to use some functionality already available as C/C++ library,
and it's more economical to use that than to implement the same thing
in OCaml - for example, compression libraries like `libz`. Another
common case is when a more performant and/or secure implementation is
available in a foreign language. For complex cryptographic code, for
example, the choice is often a library written in Rust.

OBazl makes it relatively easy to integrate such resources into your
OCaml project. Of course, you must build the foreign code first.
Again, you would use the appropriate ruleset to do this. In many,
probably most cases, the foreign library will not already have Bazel
support, in which case you will need to write or generate the code to
Bazelize it. For the most common cases - C/C++, Rust, and Go - tools
are available to automate this. It may take a little work, but the
result usually works quite well.

Once you can produce the library you want to link to - under the
caveat that OCaml can only link to it if it is linkable under standard
C linking rules - integrating it into your OCaml build is as simple as
adding it as a dependency to one of your OCaml build targets. If you
don't need to pass any special link arguments, you can just add it to
the `deps` attribute. OBazl is smart enough to distinguish between
such dependencies and OCaml dependencies and will omit the appropriate
compile commands. If you do need to pass link args, you must use the
`cc_deps` attribute, which takes a dictionary whose keys are target
labels (of the libraries to link) and whose values are strings where
you can put the link args.

OCaml's linking mechanism only takes effect on archives and
executables, so writing a compile command to link a CC library (for
example) to a module will do you no good. But you can do it with
OBazl. You don't have to attach such libraries to `ocaml_archive` or
`ocaml_executable` targets (although you can); you can instead attach
them directly to the modules that use them, and OBazl will propagate
them so that any archive or executable targets that depend on such
modules will automatically insert the appropriate link commands.
OBazl's dependency normalization will ensure that each library gets
linked at most once, no matter how many modules you attach it to. So
for example if you split the OCaml interface to a monster C library
across multiple OCaml modules, you can attach the library to each
module.

=== C/C++

=== Go

=== Rust

Suppose you have an OCaml project that uses a Rust lib. This could be
an opam package whose "build" instructions call rust to compile, for
example. To have Bazel build it, we need to generate a repo rule to
download it and BUILD.bazel files to build it. The `cargo raze` tool
does this.

The basic idea is to create a `Cargo.toml` file that references the
rust dependency (e.g. a git url), and contains a
`[package.metadata.raze]` section with directives for generating build
files for dependencies.

1. add a repo rule for rules_rust to WORKSPACE.bazel

2. install cargo raze.  do `rustup update`, then `cargo install cargo-raze`

2. use cargo raze to generate build files for rust repos

    a.  create `cargo/Cargo.toml`
       i.  deps:
```
[dependencies]
tezos-rust-libs = { git = "https://gitlab.com/tezos/tezos-rust-libs", tag = "1.1"}
```

       ii. for the rest, follow the example at [](https://github.com/google/cargo-raze`)

    b. run `cargo raze` from the cargo/ subdir you just created
