= Namespacing
:page-permalink: /:path/namespacing
:page-layout: page_rules_ocaml
:page-pkg: rules_ocaml
:page-doc: ug
:page-tags: [namespacing]
:page-last_updated: May 4, 2022
:toc-title:
:toc: true


== Overview

=== The Problem

OCaml supports namespaces _within the language_. But unlike many other
languages that support articulated names like `A.B.C`, it does not map
such "module paths" to filesystem paths.

OCaml uses a flat namespace for module source file names. If you use
the same module file name in different file system locations within a
project you will get a name clash. Every module source file must be
uniquely named.

=== The Solution

There is only one way to address the problem: give your source files
names that are likely to be unique. The easy way to do this is to
decide on a prefix string likely to be unique. That might start with
your project name, or it might replicate the filesystem path locating
your source file, by replacing filesystem separator (usually '/') with
'_' or some other character.

The downside of this solution is that it creates another problem. Now
instead of having e.g. `a/b.ml`, we need `a/a__b.ml` or the like.

A better solution is to adopt a hybrid strategy that uses both filename
prefixing and OCaml aliasing to implement a form of namespacing. That
is the strategy pursued by both Dune and OBazl.

The "top-level module aliases" facility provides a mechanism that
tools can use to emulate hierarchical filesystem-based namespacing.

Special considerations: `-no-alias-deps`, `-opaque`, and `-linkall`.

== Building Blocks

=== Type-Level Module Aliases

OCaml has a sophisticated module system that is partially tied to the
file system.

Each OCaml "compilation unit" determines a module, whose name is the
file name, capitalized and truncated to remove the extension. Thus
`foo.ml` determines module `Foo`.

The OBazl Demos repo contains some
link:https://github.com/obazl/demos_obazl/tree/main/rules_ocaml/makefiles/aliasing[basic
examples,window="_blank"], using simple makefiles, demonstrating the
interplay of module aliasing equations, namespaces, and the file
system.

File names including double underscores, such as `foo__bar.ml`, receive
special treatment. The compiler will treat the double underscore as a
dot, in this case yielding `Foo.bar`.

"[T]he compiler uses the following heuristic when printing paths:
given a path `+Lib__fooBar+`, if `Lib.FooBar` exists and is an alias for
`+Lib__fooBar+`, then the compiler will always display `Lib.FooBar`
instead of `+Lib__fooBar+`. This way the long `+Mylib__+` names stay
hidden and all the user sees is the nicer dot names. This is how the
OCaml standard library is compiled."
-- link:https://v2.ocaml.org/releases/4.14/htmlman/modulealias.html[8 Top-level module aliases,window="_blank"]


Translated into English, this seems to mean
that, for example. if `lib.ml` contains `+module FooBar = Lib__fooBar+`,
then `+Lib.FooBar+` corresponds to `+Lib__fooBar+`.

NOTE: This use of double underscores is a convention, not a rule.
Aliasing may use any legal module name. In particular `module A = A`
is legal.

WARNING: Module names are opaque!  OCaml will _not_ interpet a module name like `A__B` as the name of a module `B` in a namespace `A`.

===== References

-   link:https://v2.ocaml.org/releases/4.14/htmlman/modulealias.html[10.8 Type-level module aliases,window="_blank"]
-   link:https://blog.janestreet.com/better-namespaces-through-module-aliases[Better namespaces through module aliases,window="_blank"]
    (blogpost, 2014)

=== Resolver Modules

=== Automatic Renaming


== Namespace Models

OBazl uses the term _namespace_ to refer to a collection of modules
and/or interfaces named with a namespace prefix (such as `Stdlib\__`),
together with _resolver_ module containing an aliasing equation for
each submodule (e.g. `module List = Stdlib__List`). The name of the
resolver module serves as the name of the namespace; the "entry point"
to the namespace, as it were.

Dune calls them "wrapped" libraries. They are very commonly used, if
only because the Dune `library` stanza builds them by default. OBazl
provides support for two distinct namespace models, top-down and
bottom-up.

CAUTION: Dune uses variations on the term "wrapped library" where OBazl uses namespacing terminology.


NOTE: What OBazl calls a "namespace resolver module" (or just
"resolver") is sometimes called a "mapper" or "wrapper".

A namespace may be packaged as an OCaml archive, but this is not a
requirement; under OBazl, bottom-up namespaces may be aggregated using
`ocaml_archive` or `ocaml_library`, or may not be aggregated at all.

WARNING: 'Namespace' as used by OBazl is not a first-class concept in
the OCaml language. There is no Namespace type or keyword.

=== NS Resolver Modules

Both the top-down and the bottom-up models depend essentially on a
module containing the module aliasing equations that determine
submodules; OBazl calls such modules _ns resolver modules_ or
_resolvers_ for short. They are express using rule
link:../reference/ocaml-rules#_ocaml_ns_resolver[ocaml-ns-resolver].

=== Top-down

Top-down namespaces are defined at the aggregate level. This is the
strategy pursued by Dune: membership in a namespace is expressed by
the list of modules in a `library` stanza. Dune automatically renames
the modules, adding the namespace prefix (e.g. `Foo__`) to the module
names, and generates a resolver ("wrapper") module containing the
required module aliasing equations ; then everything is packaged up in
an archive file.

To support top-down namespaces, OBazl provides rules
`ocaml_ns_archive` and `ocaml_ns_library`; members of the namespace
are listed in the `submodules` attribute. OBazl does the same thing
Dune does: generates the resolver and renames the submodules. Both
Dune and OBazl support user-defined resolver modules for top-down
namespaces. Dune always packages namespaces in archives, but in OBazl
they may also be organized as OBazl libraries, or they may not be
aggregated at all. (See link:aggregators[Aggregators] for more on the
distinction OBazl draws between libraries and archives.)

Top-down namespaces are easy to define, but they are limited. Targets
that use a namespaced module must depend on the namespace aggregate
(`ocaml_ns_library` or `ocaml_ns_archive`) containing the module; they
cannot depend directly on submodules. If changes are made to a
submodule, all targets that depend on its namespace aggregate will be
rebuilt, whether or not they depend on the module that was changed.

==== Namespace Aggregators

* link:../reference/ocaml-rules#_ocaml_ns_archive[ocaml-ns-archive]
* link:../reference/ocaml-rules#_ocaml_ns_library[ocaml_ns_library]


Each of these rules has a `submodules` attribute which contains a list
of the labels of modules to be included in the namespace.

For example, if the name of an `ocaml_ns_library` rule is `foo`, and
it contains submodule `:bar`, then the ns module will be `Foo.cmx`,
and the bar submodule will be renamed to `Foo\__Bar.cmx`. To produce
`Foo.cmx`, OBazl will generate `Foo.ml`, containing aliasing equations
like `module Bar = Foo__Bar`.

===== How it works

This approach involves a circularity: in order to generate and compile
`Foo.cmx`, the `ocaml_ns_library` rule must depend on the submodules;
but the submodules in turn must depend on the ns resolver module
(`Foo.cmx` in this case). OBazl can get around this, though, since in
fact the ns resolver module only depends on the module names, not the
compiled modules. This is achieved using the `-no-alias-deps` option.

That solves half of the problem; the other problem to be resolved is
that each submodule must depend on the resolver module. A submodule
cannot depend on the ns aggregator rule that contains it, on pain of
circularity; yet it must depend on the resolver, and the aggregator
rule contains the information needed to generate the resolver module
source code.

We get around this circularity by subterfuge. We use a combination of
hidden
link:https://bazel.build/rules/config#label-typed-build-settings[label-typed
build settings,window="_blank"] attributes and
link:https://bazel.build/rules/config#user-defined-transitions[user-defined
transitions,window="_blank"] to pass configuration information down
the dependency chain, so that the bottom node in the chain depends on
the top node - but only for configuration data. In other words, we
split the circular dependency into a module dependency tree going from
aggregator to submodule to resolver, and a configuration dependency
going the other way around.

Rules involved in top-down namespacing (`ocaml_ns_library`,
`ocaml_ns_archive`, `ocaml_module` and `ocaml_signature`) have a
hidden attribute, `_ns_resolver`, that expresses a dependency on a
single `ocaml_ns_resolver` target. They also have a hidden
`_ns_submodules` attribute. Both of these are
link:https://bazel.build/rules/config#label-typed-build-settings[label-typed
build settings,window="_blank"].

The `ocaml_ns_resolver` target, in turn,
depends on some other label attributes. The transition functions set
these attributes at build time; in effect, they allow us to give this
resolver target "reverse dependencies": the attributes that control
its build are set by targets that depend on it. Submodules depend on
these two deps, but since the parameters controlling them are set
dynamically, at build time, the object depended on will be customized
for the submodule that depends on it.

More specifically: for all rules the hidden `_ns_resolver` attribute
has default value `@rules_ocaml//cfg/ns`. That target is a
'label_setting' whose value is [the label of] an `ocaml_ns_resolver`
target. This makes each rule (target) depend on the same ns resolver
module. The build parameters for that module are set dynamically using
transition functions. In particular, the hidden `_ns_submodules`
attribute has default value `@ocaml//ns:submodules`, which is a
`string_list_flag`; it too is set by transition functions at build time.

The result is that building an `ocaml_ns_library` or
`ocaml_ns_archive` target causes transition functions to propagate the
list of submodule names (as strings) to both the submodule dependency
targets and the hidden ns resolver target. The `ocaml_module` (and
`ocaml_signature`) implementations check this list to see if they are
included as submodules; if so, they rename the source file, prefixing
the namespace name, before compiling. The `ocaml_ns_resolver` target
uses the list to generate a structfile with the namespace name,
containing the module aliasing equations that define the namespace
membership.

For example, when we build an `ocaml_ns_library` target, the
transition functions will set the value of `_ns_resolver` to the
desired namespace, and `_ns_submodules` to the list of submodules for
the namespace. These settings will be set before bazel proceeds to
build the submodules. When the time comes to build a submodule, Bazel
will see that it depends on the ns resolver, so it will first build
the latter. The build rule for it uses the values set by the
transition functions, so the result is a resolver that depends on the
information needed to make it work to compile the submodule.

[TODO: concrete example]


=== Bottom-up

Top-down namespaces have one major shortcoming, as noted above:
clients can only depend on the aggregates; they may not depend
directly on submodules. Bottom-up namespaces eliminate this
shortcoming. Targets may depend directly on namespaced modules;
furthermore, bottom-up namespaces need not be organized as `library`
or `archive` aggregates at all. They are determined by explicitly
defining an `ocaml_ns_resolver` specifying the namespace prefix and
listing its submodules. The submodules (which may include interfaces)
indicate their membership in a namespace directly, by passing an
`ocaml_ns_resolver` target label via the `ns` attribute of
`ocaml_module` and `ocaml_signature`.

A less serious shortcoming of top-down namespaces is the use of
transition functions with hidden label-typed attributes, which adds
overhead (and considerable complexity, if you ever need to debug
them). Bottom-up namespaces use neither hidden attributes nor
transition functions.

Top-down namespaces _select_ their submodules; the submodules in a
bottom-up namespace _elect_ membership.

Bottom-up namespaces are much more powerful and flexible than top-down
namespaces. Targets can depend directly on namespaced submodules; this
can be used to optimize builds. When a bottom-up submodule is changed
only targets that depend on it are rebuilt. And since aggregation and
namespacing are orthogonal, namespaced submodules can be aggregated
_ad libitum_. For example, if a set of targets depends on a subset of
three submodules in a namespace that contains ten submodules, this
subset can be aggregated as a library or archive. Multiple aggregates
can contain submodules from the same namespace. Aggregates can even
contain submodules from multiple namespaces. The OBazl rules will
ensure that the _resolver_ module is always included in the dependency
graphs of submodules, and OBazl's dependency manager will always
normalize the graphs to remove duplicates while retaining dependency
order.

Another way to look at it: in most languages that explicitly support
some form of namespacing, namespaces are _closed_, in the sense that
the only way to access an element in the namespace is by going through
the namespace, so to speak. OBazl's bottom-up namespaces are _open_:
we can access the submodules in a bottom-up namespace without
reference to the namespace name.

Which is to say that such "namespaces", being based on OCaml's module
aliasing mechanism, are only _pseudo_-namespaces. The OCaml language
does not know anything about such namespaces; it only knows how to
resolve module aliases. For example, a reference `A.B` might be
aliased to `A\__B` (i.e. `a__b.ml`, automatically renamed from
`b.ml`), but module names are opaque; OCaml will not interpret `A\__B`
as "submodule `B` in namespace `A` ". So we can access that
(sub)module directly, without "going through" module A. In fact we can
include it in any namespace we like; for example, we can put it in
namespace `Foo` by putting the following aliasing equation in the
resolver module `foo.ml`: `module B = A__B`. We can also expose it
under a different name: `module Bar = A__B` would expose it as
`Foo.Bar`.

As an example: just about everything in the OCaml compiler sources
depends on the standard library, which is packaged as an archive
`stdlib.cma` built by target `//stdlib`. If those dependencies are
expressed as dependencies on `//stdlib`, then a change in any stdlib
submodule will trigger a rebuild of almost everything. But if they are
expressed as direct submodule dependencies, e.g.
`//stdlib:Stdlib.List`, then the rebuild triggered by a change to one
submodule will include only those targets that genuinely depend on it,
directly or indirectly. (Example: link:https://github.com/obazl-repository/ocaml/blob/a09bf0a52e12696b19723d31b1da9b4f2abe95a9/parsing/BUILD.bazel#L105[parsing/BUILD.bazel,window="_blank"])

'''

* bottom-up ns does not automatically entail an aggregate. Aggregates
  containing namespaced modules must be explicitly defined, and they
  may contain a subset of the submodules in an ns, or submodules from
  multiple namespaces. IOW, aggregation and namespacing are orthogonal.

* clients cannot depend on a namespace; they can only depend on
  aggregates or singletons (modules, sigs).

* a change to a submodule in a ns will cause a recompile of any
  aggregate that contains it, and of anything that depends on the
  aggregate. but targets that depend on a submod directly will not be
  affected by changes to other submods in the ns. Whereas with a
  top-down ns, targets can only depend on the ns-aggregates, so any
  change in any submodule will force a recompile of all cllients.

* changing one submodule does not entail a rebuild of any sibling submodules.

* the user may provide a custom resolver module, which can be any
  module that contains the module aliasing equations needed to support
  the ns. submodules then just list this module's label in their `ns`
  attribute. This is what happens with the Stdlib modules of the
  compiler.

* supports direct dependency on individual submodules in the
  namespace. We cannot depend on a dotted module path, but we can
  depend on a module in a namespace, and we can use a naming
  convention to me it look like a dotted path. For example, the
  bazelized version of the OCaml compiler uses dotted names for the
  Stdlib; so the target name to compile the `buffer.ml` module of the
  stdlib is `Stdlib.Buffer`; to build it: `bazel build
  //stdlib/Stdlib.Buffer`. NB this is just a convention.

* normalized/optimized build files can be queried to show optimized
  dep graphs i.e. no spurious dependencies. I.e. if you depend on a a top-down
  `ocaml_ns_library`, the dep graph will show a dependency on all
  submodules in the ns lib. With bottom-up namespacing and optimized
  build files no spurious deps will be shown.
* OTOH, if you depend on the `ns_resolver` of a bottom-up namespace,
  the dep graph will not include the submodules, since the submodules
  depend on the resolver, not the other way around. So there are trade-offs.
  ** FIXME: is there a way to write a query that will show the
     submodules too? probably. can this be done by an aspect?



== Troubleshooting

=== Case studies

==== Multiple submodules with same name

===== Case A

This situation arose during OBazl development. To develop a tool we
wanted to borrow some code from Dune for parsing Dune files. The Dune
code contains `src/dune_lang/escape.ml` and `src/stdune/escape.ml`
(and their interface files). If both were included in ns libraries
then name clashes could emerge. This is because namespace aliasing
always starts with the original module (file) name. So in this case we
had two namespaces both of whose resolvers contained aliasing equations
for 'Escape'.

The compile for `dune_lang/template.ml`, which depends on `Escape`,
was failing with `Unbound value` for `Escape.escape`. The problem was
not that OCaml could not resolve the reference to `Escape`, but that
it resolved it to `stdune/escape.ml` instead of the intended
`dune_lang/escape.ml`, which does not define `escape`.

The reason was that `template.ml` began with `open Stdune`, so the ns
resolver for that namespace was used to look up `Escape`, yielding a
reference to `stdune/escape.ml`.

But if `template.ml` starts by opening `Stdune`, then how else could a
reference to `Escape` be resolved? This turned out to by my error: I
had included both `escape.ml` files in their respective package
namespace libraries, without bothering to closely inspect the 'main'
ns modules (`stdune/stdune.ml` and `dune_lang/dune_lang.ml`). These
did _not_ include aliasing equations for `Escape`. So the reference to
it within `dune_lang/template.ml` would be resolved without using any
namespace (i.e. aliasign) lookups.

To make this work in OBazl use the following technique:

**WARNING** the following is obsolete (our namespacing strategy has changed)

* Exclude the non-namespaced files from the ns-env. One way to do this is to use the `exclude` parameter of the `glob` function; for example:

```
    ns_env(aliases = glob(["*.ml"], exclude = ["escape.ml"]))
```

* Do not list the non-namespaced module in the `submodules` dictionary of the `ocaml_ns_library` rule.

* Do not use a `prefix` attribute on the `ocaml_module` rule instances used to build the non-namespaced modules.

* If the non-namespaced module depends on a namespaced module, you
  must '-open' the namespace containing the latter. Use the prefix of
  your `ns_env()` as the module name. For example:

```
    opts = ["-open", "Demos_Obazl_Stdune__00_ns_env"]
```

NOTE: Version 2 supports an `open` attribute for rules `ocaml_module` and `ocaml_signature`.

>        Currently this must be done manually, but will eventually be automated.

===== Case B

Same problem involving module `Glob`, found in `src/dune_engine` and `other_libs/dune_glob`.

The error message:

```
File "bazel-out/darwin-fastbuild/bin/obazl/dune_engine/_obazl_/Demos_Obazl_Dune_engine__Predicate_lang.ml", line 1:
Error: The implementation bazel-out/darwin-fastbuild/bin/obazl/dune_engine/_obazl_/Demos_Obazl_Dune_engine__Predicate_lang.ml
       does not match the interface bazel-out/darwin-fastbuild/bin/obazl/dune_engine/_obazl_/Demos_Obazl_Dune_engine__Predicate_lang.cmi:
       ...
       In module Glob:
       Values do not match:
         val of_glob :
           Demos_Obazl_Dune_engine__Glob.t -> (string -> bool) t/2
       is not included in
         val of_glob : Demos_Obazl_Dune_glob__Glob.t -> t/1
       File "bazel-out/darwin-fastbuild/bin/obazl/dune_engine/_obazl_/Demos_Obazl_Dune_engine__Predicate_lang.mli", line 49, characters 2-27:
         Expected declaration
       File "bazel-out/darwin-fastbuild/bin/obazl/dune_engine/_obazl_/Demos_Obazl_Dune_engine__Predicate_lang.ml", line 133, characters 6-13:
         Actual declaration
       File "bazel-out/darwin-fastbuild/bin/obazl/dune_engine/_obazl_/Demos_Obazl_Dune_engine__Predicate_lang.ml", line 116, characters 2-24:
         Definition of type t/1
       File "bazel-out/darwin-fastbuild/bin/obazl/dune_engine/_obazl_/Demos_Obazl_Dune_engine__Predicate_lang.ml", lines 3-8, characters 0-22:
         Definition of type t/2
Target //obazl/dune_engine:_Predicate_lang failed to build
```

In short: the problem arose because of the way OBazl handles
dependencies. It retains transitive deps and strictly preserves
ordering. In this case, the way we listed dependencies resulted in the
insertion of `dune_glob/glob.cmo` between `predicate_lang.mli` and
`dune_engine/glob.cmo`, so it and `predicate_lang.ml` used different
`Glob` modules.

Long story short: sometimes this can happen if a structfile and its
sigfile have different deps. Still not sure what causes this problem,
but the workaround was to move the dep on //obazl/dune_glob from _Glob
to _Glob.cmi.

**B** Same name for ns main module and ns submodule

Demo set035/case03: ocaml_ns_module.name = color, contains submodule:

        "//namespaces/obazl/set030/case01:color": "Color",

Only way around this is to change the main ns name?

'''

=== Tips

* Count your underscores! It's easy to write `+Foo_Bar_Baz+` when you
  should write `+Foo__Bar_Baz+`, in which case you may get an 'Unbound
  module' warning.

* If you use a main module, you probably need to exclude it from the ns_env. Otherwise it will be aliased.
 e.g. from dune_glob:

```
ns_env(aliases = glob( ["*.ml"], exclude = ["dune_glob.ml"] ) + ["lexer.mll"])
```

=== inconsistent assumptions over interface

```
File "namespaces/obazl/set300/case370/foo-bar/test.ml", line 1:
Error: Files namespaces/obazl/set300/case370/foo-bar/test.cmo
       and bazel-out/darwin-fastbuild/bin/namespaces/obazl/set300/case370/foo-bar/_obazl_/Demos_Namespaces_Obazl_Set300_Case370_Foo_bar__Red.cmo
       make inconsistent assumptions over interface Demos_Namespaces_Obazl_Set300_Case370_Foo_bar__Red
```
